---
title: "There are no poets left"
---
We used to mostly sell poetry and urdu literature but nowadays we mostly sell religious texts like the Qura'n Sharif. This is because now the environment has changed. There is less emphasis on literature and culture. My grandfather was also a well-known poet. His name was Ghulam Nabi but his *takhallus* (pen-name) was Jamil. His poetry can be found in Urdu school textbooks even today. My great-grandfather who founded the depot was fondly known as Kalim Ahmedabadi. This was his pen-name, his real name Abdul Karim. He was a poet too. He was an *ustad* or master-poet. He had once organised a *mushaira* or congregation which was attended by the biggest poets of the time. Sahir Ludhianvi was one of the attendees. 

My grandfather and great-grandfather's time was the high-point of Urdu poetry in the city and a special time for the book depot as well. Legendary poets like Waris Hussain Alvi and Mohammad Alvi used to frequent the depot. In a way you could say our shop was a hub for Ahmedabad's poets. People would come together and share their poetry. It wasn't just a shop it was a *baithak* or a salon where people discussed literature and ideas.  At the time, there were many who took a keen interest in Urdu. In those days *mushairas* and *mehfils* (poetry recitals) were held every fortnight and so people developed a taste for Urdu literature. That atmosphere no longer exists. It changed around the 1980s and a lot more rapidly post-1992...The environment is different now. 
