---
title: "Munir Kalimi explains the origins of the depot"
---
Since the time of Badshah Ahmed Shah, this region was one of the main areas of congregation. It was known as the Maidan Shah- the area between the Bhadra fort and Teen Darwaza. Since this area attracts a lot of passersby my great grandfather must have thought why not set up a shop here. This depot has been here since 1928- so almost a hundred years. 

My family has seen this area undergo various changes over time. Although this area was always a mix of residential and commercial, the market has expanded considerably over the years. Many of the old residents have left the place. I remember that earlier there were several members of the Modi community who lived and worked here. Their traditional trade was the oil press. There used to be a strong Parsi community here as well. The Parsis tended to be well-educated and ended up becoming doctors or civil servants. Several emigrated to the West. The Fonseca building, for example, which is next to our new depot used to be a Parsi clinic. 

Our book business has expanded and we now have two depots in this area. We also have a printing press because my late father was keen to publish books about the history of the city. When my father took over the business, we began publishing our own booklets in Gujarati, Urdu and a few in English. It was very important to my father that the common man learns more about the history of his city. In addition to history, my father was somewhat of a social worker. Post-retirement he decided to take care of the library at Sarkhej Roza (a Sufi mausoleum). He was shocked at the terrible state it was in. He was instrumental in re-organizing the archives. He tried to mentor young people who care about history and in a small way I try to do the same.
