---
title: "The market and the temple as refuge"
---
Mithun Tanhaji Shinde and his family are known as 'the Maharashtrians' in the market. They sell glass, lacquer and plastic bangles outside the premises of the Bhadrakali temple. His family has been selling bangles here for three generations. It was Mithun bhai's grandmother who first set up the bangle shop. "At the time, my father was probably five yeard old and she would bring him along with her," Mithun bhai tells me. He seems to know this story very well. The story of how his family of Maharashtrian bangle-sellers made Ahmedabad their home and the Bhadra-Teen Darwaza bazaar their workplace. 

"Our family is from the Latur district of Maharashtra. One of the reasons why we moved here is because Latur is impoverished and draught-prone. My uncle first came here- he ran away from home for whatever reason and started working here as a fisherman. He fished in the Sabarmati river. The rest of the family- a group including my grandmother came to Ahmedabad in search of him. The search party arrived at Kalupur railway station and not knowing where to go from there they ended up here since it is a well-known public space. By complete coincidence, I think, they managed to locate my uncle near the Teen Derwaza fish market which is where the fishermen sell their fish even today. It was a happy reunion and the family then decided to stay on. There was not much to go back to. 

My grandmother would just sit next to the temple and bide time. They were driven away from the sidewalks by the authorities so they decided to live next to the temple. Some good samaritan gave her some toys and other things to sell so she could earn a living and feed my father. This is how my grandmother started our family livelihood. My father has retired but comes to the market all the time. He has spent his whole life here. My wife is a homemaker and I handle the family business now. My daughters help out with the shop too from time to time."
