---
title: "Encroachment, Displacement and the Question of Occupancy Rights"
---
The Bhadra Heritage Plaza and the repeated eviction of the urban poor as part of redevelopment projects has a longer colonial and post-colonial history. In this history we see the same sites repeatedly emerge as loci of urban displacement. As early as 1883, ten years after the Ahmedabad Municipality was founded, the then-District Deputy Collector Edaljee Dosabhai reported “several cases of encroachments” in the Bhadra-Teen Derwaza area. In a letter to J.B. Richey, Collector of Ahmedabad, Dosabhai sought advice on how the trespassers are “to be dealt with”. The question of “occupancy rights”, the officials surmised, remained murky and could not easily be resolved. Madhuben is originally from the Kathiawar region of Gujarat and comes from a family of traditional goat-herders. “My parents and those before them made their living by working on people’s farms as daily wage labourers.” Madhuben moved to the city to make a better life for herself and her daughters who also now work in the market. Urban migration, however, was followed by urban displacement both, at home and in the workplace. Madhuben’s family lived by the banks of the Sabarmati in an informal settlement or basti until 2005 when the Riverfront Project was approved by the government. Families like Madhuben’s were relocated to the outskirts of the city as a result of the development project. The Riverfront project involved building a promenade along the river and setting up public parks to promote pedestrian-friendly public spaces. Today the Riverfront represents a clean, orderly space in the city that middle-class Ahmedabadis feel proud of. Public transport is banned and the parks require a fee upon entry. For Madhuben, relocating to far-flung Odhav was difficult and the commute to work was long but the family persevered on. With the current eviction drives at the market, it seems the city that Madhuben moved to and has since embraced, refuses to embrace her in return.

