---
title: "The Plaza"
---
The germ of the Bhadra Plaza was first conceived in the 1970s by BV Doshi, a renowned architect, trained by Le Corbusier (whose imprint on the city is also prominent), responsible for much of the city’s iconic post-independence, modernist architecture. Following a collaborative partnership between the French government and the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation which resulted in the formation of Ahmedabad Heritage Centre (AHC) in 2009, the Bhadra Fort Conservation and Bhadra Plaza Revitalization Project was finally taken up. The creation of a paved plaza around the perimeter of the Bhadra fort was designed to protect the medieval structure and address congestion due to vehicular traffic and street hawkers. A report prepared by city planners envisions the project as a “revitalization strategy” to address the “decay” of urban heritage as a result of “extreme density, overcrowding and encroachments.”

Rajubhai, known in the area as Rajubhai “Rumaalwala” (the handkerchief guy) has been selling handkerchiefs and women’s sandals for the last forty-five years. Rajubhai remembers the market of his childhood days. Although much smaller, it was a vibrant and interconnected hub back then too. He recalls accompanying his father to the market and buying gaud (jaggery) and selling trinkets in small tokris (woven baskets) near the fort. “When everything was renovated (i.e. the Plaza), they spent all this money but forgot to think of what they are going to do about this market and how they will incorporate it into their plan. *Pachchis taka na sau taka thayi gaya* - a 50% problem became a 100% problem. But that is their fault not ours. We need to earn a living and keep our homes running.” Like Rajubhai, many vendors refuse to buy the idea that the plaza was built to make the area more pedestrian-friendly and accessible. They argue that it has caused the commercial sprawl that exists today. Urban poverty and migration attract scores of new street vendors to the plaza. The expansion of the spatial perimeter around the fort was envisioned as a paved, Parisian promenade where flaneurs and culture-vultures could soak in Ahmedabad’s history and heritage. Needless to say, it had a very different urban denizen in mind. What it did end up attracting were scores of new street vendors flocking to the plaza to make a living and reap in the benefits of redevelopment. This is the irony that many older “traditional” vendors Rajubhai lament, with a hint of schadenfreude, “This plaza plan has boomeranged and blown up in their faces…but how is that our fault?”

