---
title: "The Marwaris of Bhadra Bazaar"
---
The “Marwaris” as they are called and self-identify as are prominent members of the Bhadra-Teen Derwaza market community. They occupy the eastern periphery of the Plaza. Apart from their Rajasthani clothes (the neighbouring western Indian state,)  and tattoos, they are famous across the city for their Plaster of Paris statues of Hindu deities. Of late, the community has diversified, preferring to sell Chinese-made clocks, watches and mirrors during “off-season”. Although the community has lived in Ahmedabad for at least a hundred years, if not more, the Marwaris of Bhadra-Teen Darwaza bazaar trace their roots to the Marwar region of Rajasthan. The community belongs to the nomadic Baore or Bawri tribe and settled on a hillock in the city which was leased from a Parsi woman named Gulbai. Today, the area is known as Gulbai Tekra (hillock) and it is famous for “Hollywood Basti”, the pejorative but most widely-known name of the informal settlement where the Baoris have resided ever since. 

If photo-essays and journalistic pieces are to be believed, the area is known as such because of how stylish, good-looking, and flamboyant the people of this community are. The gaze towards the community echoes colonial ethnographies where essentialized character traits and physical features help define and identify a people. A 2019 piece in the Deccan Herald describes the community as the “city’s best-kept secret” before going on to describe the “rustic charm” of a decidedly urban community. The community has long dealt with this gaze. What is today described by those outside the community as their “liberated”, “feisty” and “free-spirited disposition” was once deemed criminal under the colonial Criminal Tribes Act of 1871. Like many nomadic and itinerant tribes, the Baoris were subjected to colonial surveillance and persecution and were branded ‘hereditary criminals’. This was partly due to their nomadic lifestyle and because of their traditional livelihood as hunters and trappers of small game. The name Baori or Bawariya, comes from the traditional coir rope traps they made and used on hunts.

It is perhaps due to this history of criminalization that the vendors call themselves Marwari, preferring to point to their geographical rather than tribal origins. It is a painful history that is best left unsaid although that is not to say that generational shame and marginalization define the Marwaris of the bazaar. Poojaben is twenty-two years old and the third generation of vendors from her family. She loves wearing her community’s traditional attire. Although she has never known the life of a nomad and is a born and bred Ahmedabadi, she believes, “desh badle pan bhes nai, the land changes but not the guise. I still like to dress like a Rajasthani, we stick to our roots even if we move.”
