---
title: "Exploring the Bhadra-Teen Darwaza Maidan"
---

Facing the Bhadra fort on the far-left is a dicrepit but still formidable structure which was once the palace of Azam Khan built by a Mughal governor in 1637. Today it is a dusty old government book depot where all manner of obscure government gazettes are sold. Prior, to its current avatar as a run-down *sarkari* or bureaucratic office, it once served as a colonial jail and a hospital. After the fall of the Mughals, it would seem, the building fell prey to the iron cage of modern bureacracy and governmentality. Most of the vendors on this side of the market sell clothes, footwear and faux-leather bags. 

On the other end, marked in pink is the Gujarati Vernacular Society, set up by a colonial official in collaboration with local intelligentsia and industrialist funding in 1848. Today it seems to be more or less moribund, but outside its precincts are "Marwari" **(see story 3)** vendors who sell an assortment of watches and clocks sourced from nearby wholesale markets. 

In the middle of the "Bhadra-side" of the market is a garden with a statue of a prominent moutachioed man, perched on a chair, surveying the surroundings. Everyone refers to it as "The Baronet's Statue", **marked in purple on the map**. He is Sir Chinubhai Madhavlal, a textile mill-owner and philanthropist. The statue is tied to the market’s origin story as well as the city’s economic and labour history.  “Ahmedabad is a city of mills, " an elderly vendor tells me. “It had 101 mills. In the 1980s, when these mills closed down, there was a lot of unemployment. How else should people make a living? So they picked up whatever they could get hold of and started selling them here, by the side of the road or on push-carts.” Despite the shifting trajectories of labour in the city and the expulsion of the labour-force into informality and precarity, the baronet’s statue overlooks the market--the old boss still looms large.

As one walks further down, past the Baronet, one approaches the "Teen Darwaza-side" of the market. This half of the market mostly includes Muslim vendors who sell cosmetics, women's jewellery, festive clothes and accessories. Before arriving at Teen Darwaza, one notices a pristine looking masjid which is surrounded by restaurants and eateries. This is Alif Masjid (marked on the map in black) and this is where I learned about the famous Kalimi family and the book depot **(marked in yellow)** which is **Story No. 5** on this walking tour. 

Teen Darwaza is crowded and significantly more chaotic since eviction drives have not begun on this end of the market. Unlike the Bhadra fort, which is cordoned off from the rest of the space thanks to the new plaza **(see Story 2)**, the Teen Darwaza stands right in the middle of all the madness. There is a fish market nearby and though the smell on a hot day is nauseating, it seems that no one in the market- neither the shoppers nor the tenacious vendors seem perturbed. One of the vendors will likely direct you to *Lakshmi no divo* or Lakshmi's lamp **(marked in orange)**. Legend has it that this lamp has been burning in one of the alcoves of the Teen Darwaza for the last 600 years. 

It was a Muslim family that decided to place this earthen lamp, and as its custodians, several generations have ensured it stays burning. What has Goddess Lakshmi got to do with this place you ask? And what is her "Muslim connection"? For this we need to walk all the way in the opposite direction, towards the Bhadra fort once again. 

Facing the fort, take the exit on the left towards the main road, known as the apna bazaar exit. Just before the main road, one has to make their way through various carts selling children's clothes, underwear and lingerie, candy, toys and lots of imitation jewellery. There is a small shrine with a roof made of corrugated iron with green pain over it. This is the Lakshmi shrine, marked on the map in grey. **Click on Story 3** to learn more about what links Lakshmi, a sufi shrine, an ever-burning lamp and the market as part of a larger, shared history. 

The Bhadra-Teen Darwaza market intricately woven into the historical, sacral and imagined geography of the area. This is why the vendors argue that the market, much like the historic structures that urban planners and conservationists are so desperate to protect, is just as integral to the city's history and urban identity. "We are *gareebon nu Big Bazaar*" or "Big Bazaar for the Poor" a vendor tells me, clearly pleased with his neologism. He means to say that the poor and working class don't have malls and retail-chains like Big Bazaar where they can shop. The bazaars and the surrounding sites are places where the working poor can shop, sell, eat and cohabit. 
