---
title: "The evolution of the bazaar through the eyes of Ratniben"
---
Poojaben’s great-aunt, Ratniben, came to the market as a young bride on the recommendation of her uncle who was a vendor in the area. At the time, the community exclusively sold statues and figurines. Following the traditional division of labour in the community, Ratniben’s husband was the sculptor, while she was in charge of sales and the more public-facing side of the business. “At the time there weren't that many vendors--just people with laaris (carts) selling chhaas (buttermilk), cutlery, and other odd bits and bobs. We were able to sell the statues here for Rs. 100-150. We were happy and went home thinking we will have something to eat and some to buy plaster of Paris to make some more statues. I used to come here with my baby girl and sell. She is forty-five years old now.”

Most of the vendors in the market are young since their parents have handed over the daily affairs. Even without evictions and police harassment, street-vending in the Ahmedabad summers is grueling. Ratniben is no different, although she likes to visit every now and then and meet old friends. It is the perfect opportunity to get a sense of how the area and market has changed over time from an old hand. When I first came here the community hall on the right side of the fort did not exist. I remember there were some horse-carriages around where the building is now. I used to take the 54 bus to get here. Even the Bhadrakali Mandir which is so big now did exist in this way. It was a small shrine. There was a road going through the Bhadra fort and we used to sell our wares inside the fort.” 

The Bhadra-Teen Derwaza bazaar, she tells me, expands through kinship networks across generations. It is a “paramparagat” (traditional is the closest translation) livelihood, in the sense that it is something one generation bequeaths to the next. “We started with maybe 5 people from my family and now about 25 people from my family are vendors here. I don’t think it’s possible for someone to come to this area and just set up shop out of nowhere.” 

After chatting over chai served in thimble-sized paper cups, Ratniben offers to walk with me and show me around the Bhadra fort.
