---
title: "Important landmarks in the area"
---

The Bhadra-Teen Darwaza market is spread out across an area marked by two medieval historic structures on each end, namely the Bhadra fort and the Teen Darwaza. On account of these structures, the area was declared a heritage site by UNESCO in 2017. Lying at the heart of the "old city", it is India's first "World Heritage City". During the Mughal period, the area was known as the Maidan-e-Shahi, the royal public square where parades and festivals were once held. Even then, the presence of local vendors and markets was remarked upon by Johann Albrecht de Mandelso, a seventeenth-century traveller. In his *Travels in Western India* Mandelslo describes it as "the king's market". Besides the Maidan-e-Shahi he describes "four Bazaars or public places where are sold all kinds of merchandise" (p.22). It is noteable that public space (maidan) and bazaar is used interchangeably by Mandelslo, indicating the centrality of commerce as part of a larger exchange of bodies, sensory experiences, and cultures that marks the urban 'public' sphere.

Apart from the Bhadra fort and the Teen Darwaza the area is dotted with medieval, modern and modern-masquerading-as-ageold landmarks. Today the the Bhadra fort is flanked by the Bhadrakali **(red)** and Baucharma temple **(blue)**. Many vendors place their carts and stalls outside the perimeter of these temples, in the hopes of attracting temple-goers. The Bhadra vendors used to sell their goods within the premises of the medieval fort. It was a much smaller, contained market. One vendor whose family has worked in the area for the last fifty years and sells women’s cosmetics nearby reminisces, “We lived and worked here, within the fort premises. At lunch time, all of us, Hindu and Muslim would unpack our tiffin-boxes and eat together.” Since then, the market has expanded considerably. This is in part a product of increasing purchasing power, the growth of an urban lower-middle class, and the expansion of temples in the wake of contemporary politico-cultural currents in the city. 

While most remember a more modest version of the Bhadrakali temple, nobody quite remembers when the Bahucharma temple came up. All places of worship, but particularly Hindu temples in a post-Ramjanmabhoomi India have a way of acquiring timelessness. “I think this was always there. I don’t remember but it’s been here for a long time.” One hears a variation of this often. The Bhadrakali mandir is said to have been built in the eighteenth century during Maratha rule. To most, however, it is a *prāchīn* or ancient temple that has existed since time immemorial, as. Regardless of what came first or who has a legitimate claim over the space, this coexistence is strange and fascinating. Heritage conservation projects emphasize the importance of cordoning off the medieval fort to protect it from the hustle bustle of urban life.  In reality, the fort sits cheek-by-jowl with other structures, both old and new, in such close proximity that they appear to be springing from one another. How does one reconcile this with claims of preservation and heritage conservation? The co-existence of informal labour and a heritage site poses a problem not because of the threat of encroachment, but because it is an eye-sore. It is a reminder of the histories of labour migration and urban poverty in modern India, when we’d much rather be marveling at an iconic structure of Sultanate splendour.

