---
title: "Tu Agewan Bani Gayi Chhe- You are a leader now"
---
I have been here for the last 27 years. I used to be a street vendor at the Law Garden market. I used to sit there with my mother-in-law and baby boy. We barely sold anything. Then my sister-in-law, my older brother’s wife brought me here. When I first came here, I was pregnant with my first daughter, today she has a child of her own and also works here. There weren't so many vendors at the time. There was only a small chowk (circle/center) at that time not like this today. There was no plaza, just a road and a parking area which is where I used to sell. I used to sell little popats (parrots), chaklis (sparrows) and haathis (elephants). That time they used to sell very well -I'd make 200 rupees a day. We used to come here from our homes by auto rickshaw- which would bump along the roads. I was pregnant then and people told me to stay at home. But earning money made me feel so good that I came throughout my pregnancy. The first thing I bought for myself with my earnings was a pair of chandi ni payal (silver anklets). I love jewelry. I knew I would be able to make something of myself in this bazaar. At one point, we were also selling cutlery and glassware but now we mainly sell clocks and watches. It's been 15 years since we've shifted to selling clocks almost exclusively. I get these from a wholesale market nearby. Now I don't have to travel very far to get my products. The commute costs me about Rs. 80, there and back.
Some fifteen or twenty years back, around the time this paved plaza was built, a woman called Champaben from the women’s cooperative SEWA (Self-Employed Women’s Association) urged me to become a member. I regularly paid the membership fee of five rupees and encouraged other women vendors to become members. I felt that through organizational strength we could maybe address this problem of jagyā (space or the lack thereof to sell). I convinced a lot of women vendors to organize themselves and I was really good at it, so I guess at some point they told me, “tu agewan bani gayi chhe you have become a leader now.”
At the SEWA meetings, I regularly brought up the issue of the evictions. SEWA offered to facilitate meetings but informed us that we would have to speak up for ourselves. After some meetings with local police officials we were assured protected space where we could temporarily sell. I even went to Delhi as part of a larger body of street-vendors around the time the Street Vendors Act was going to be passed in parliament. I participated in protests and demonstrations there and got to meet with leaders of street vendors’ unions. This was around 2014. The municipal corporation eventually allotted each of us a 4x4 sq ft. space for our stalls and we were given a license. But as you can see the evictions and dabaan continues.
When I first became a community leader, there was a lot of fear. I used to tremble when I saw the police in the area. I kept thinking, “They are going to throw me out, any moment now.” Earlier we wouldn't sit on the chair when we met saheb (corporator, policeman etc/figures of authority) but then we learned that it's okay and that we don't need to sit on the floor. Earlier I would be completely veiled in front of them. With time, slowly, I built my confidence. Now I can talk to them, raise our issues and I also attend meetings and court hearings. I enjoy it now. I don’t mind that it takes away from my work. I see this as work too. Honestly, I prefer this work compared to selling. I'm more interested in this. I enjoy being a representative for people. My kids and others in my family chip in. They tell me, “Do what you have to do, we'll take over and make sure things sell.”
