---
title: "Dabaan ni Gaadi- Memories of Eviction and Belonging"
---
It quickly becomes evident that the history of the bazaar is inseparable from the history of *dabaan*. *Dabaan* is a word that comes up in conversations almost immediately. It refers to the pressure tactics, harassment and eviction the vendors have faced at the hands of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC). The symbol of these arbitrary eviction drives is the AMC van, the *dabaan ni gaadi*. 

Like most days, it is a busy day at the Bhadra-Teen Darwaza market. Business hasn’t quite picked up yet but there is a steady stream of temple-goers and passersby eyeing the various stalls. Many have brought their children along with them to do a darshan (pray) at the temple. On their way out, as promised, a pit-stop at the *imli* (tamarind) and *mukhwaas* (a sort of refreshing after-meal, palate cleanser consisting of fennel, sugar, seeds etc.) carts is a must. I gingerly introduce myself as a student who is interested in knowing more about the market and the surrounding area. Most vendors are busy trying to attract customers and get on with their day. Yet, to my surprise, there is always time for a brief chat. No one seems to be in a hurry or bothered by me interrupting their work day. A group of older, male vendors gather and it is decided that Surendra*bhai* (brother) is the best person to speak to. “He knows the whole history from A to Z.”

Surendra*bhai* is a community leader in the area and has brought his colleague Purshottam*bhai* along who is also well-regarded in the area. The two sell "ladies items" (jewellery, hair clips, clothing) and their families have worked here for decades. Like most vendors I spoke to, their first memory of the Bhadra-Teen Darwaza area is from their childhood. For most people, the bazaar has been a part of their life either by marriage or because their parents and grandparents worked here. “My mother sat (sold) here for 35 years,” Surendrabhai informs me. A community leader in her time, Surendrabhai has now taken up the mantle from his mother. Ratniben came to the market as a young bride. Now her grandchildren help out with the stall too. “ I have never faced anything like this in my entire life.” Given their ties to the place, the waves of eviction feel like a slap in the face. When vendors speak of their experiences with the Municipality there is pain and hurt in their voices. In most Indian cities, the working poor are quite used to facing apathy and condescension in their everyday dealings with law enforcement and government authorities. But this is different. It is clear that the AMC’s treatment of the vendors in the area cuts deep. “We have been here for years. To tell you the truth, when they evict us, ātma mari jaye, a part of our soul dies.” Conversations with the vendors revealed their close ties to the area and a deep investment in community welfare. The way they see it, it is because of the market, that the area has developed as a major urban hub. 

“We are heart of city (sic.)," Purshottam*bhai* uses the English phrase to describe the market. "It is because of us that people visit the temples and the historical sites in the area. We bring in the people. Poor people from far flung places, even nearby villages, come here and do their shopping.” This is a struggle between those who see the market as a beating “heart”- peopled, bustling and chaotic- and those who see it as an impediment to urban redevelopment and planning. The repeated evictions and coercion by the Municipality, reveal a fundamental schism of contesting visions of the city. 


