---
title: "The Presence of Lakshmi and other Goddesses"
---

The area is peppered with shrines, tombs and commemorative statues that pay obeisance to learned Sufi saints, patrons with deep-pockets and goddesses offering protection and good fortune. The Sultanate-era Bhadra fort is flanked by the Bhadrakali temple and the Bahucharma temple on either side. Bhadrakali is well known as the Devi (goddess) in her ferocious form but Bahucharma is a local goddess. One of the many lesser-known, regional iterations of the Shakti or Mother Goddess cult in north-western India, Bahucharma is particularly favoured by women and the trans community or hijras. Over time, however, she has become Ma to everyone. Despite her subversive origin story, families, young men and children all bow to her today.

The closeness and inter-connected nature of these structures is jarring and chaotic but also strangely banal. No one seems to think much of it. It forms an integral part of daily routines, visits to pray for a successful job interview and special family trips with the kids for school shopping before the academic year. Another reason for this banality is because it forms part of a larger urban landscape that is littered with totems of various kinds, across time periods, memorializing someone’s association with the place. Vendors fondly recall an older version of a Lakshmi statue that stood at the centre of the Plaza. “This Lakshmi statue is new. The Dena Bank people had one before this that was much loved. It stood in the middle of a fountain. If you saw it, you would think Ma Lakshmi herself has appeared amidst us. We vendors loved that statue. This was some thirty years ago.” 

Also located in the plaza *chowk* (centre) is a statue of a distinguished, moustachioed man. He is Sir Chinubhai Madhavlal, a textile mill-owner and philanthropist. The statue is tied to the market’s origin story as well as the city’s economic and labour history.  “Ahmedabad is a city of mills, " an elderly vendor tells me. “It had 101 mills. In the 1980s, when these mills closed down, there was a lot of unemployment. How else should people make a living? So they picked up whatever they could get hold of and started selling them here, by the side of the road or on push-carts.” Despite the shifting trajectories of labour in the city and the expulsion of the labour-force into informality and precarity, the baronet’s statue overlooks the market--the old boss still looms large.

The city of mills was, before that, the city of Sufi shrines. Most Ahmedabadis are unaware of the city’s medieval history as a hub of learned spiritual scholars. These shrines are maintained by local caretakers and neighbouring residents who remain loyal patrons. They don’t, however, feature prominently in the city’s urban topography and are easily overlooked. As I was leaving the market, I spotted an enclosure. Next to it was a pile of rubbish and I didn’t feel like venturing in. Its creaky metal doors appeared weighed down by rusty locks and red threads. A tell-tale sign, that someone, somewhere paid a visit during a time of need. If it weren’t for these previous visitors who found solace in this place at some point, I wouldn’t have known this was yet another Sufi shrine in the market (there are at least four nearby). One of the vendors, who’s *laari* (cart) is located nearby notices me poking around and tells me that yes it is indeed a Sufi shrine. “You don’t know about the story?”

