---
title: "Lakshmi and the Market/ The Market as Lakshmi
---
Apart from an insistence on religious syncretism, the story of Lakshmi is also central to what binds Ahmedabadis across caste, religion and class- *dhandho* or business. Although it is rooted in a much longer history, predating the Ahmedabad Municipality and the contemporary politics of urban displacement, one can’t help but think of this marking of territory in the context of the larger sacral geography of the area. This imagined geography challenges state-centric definitions of public space and spatiality. The story of Lakshmi and, to some extent, the statue of the baronet is a way of physically anchoring the history of the market in the history of the space. The area was destined to be a place of commerce because Lakshmi decided to stay. A Sultanate guard compelled the goddess to say and sacrificed himself in the process. His spirit too permeates the bazaar. It is through the story of Lakshmi that the vendors narrativise the history of the market and their own sense of belonging. It is through these stories that those at the margins of the Ahmedabad's urban imagination construct their relationship with their work and their workplace, in the context of a larger spatial politics of eviction, development, heritage and urban planning. Similarly, the surrounding Sufi shrines and temples represent the vendors’ everyday routines and interactions with the area. These shrines and stories are a way of saying “I *am* from here, can’t you see?” 
How does one explain this sense of belonging to a Municipality official? An aged bangle-seller tells me,“They ask us what proof do you have that this place belongs to you? Do you have any *dastavez* (documents) or is this your father’s *jagir* (fiefdom).” He can’t point to the Lakshmi story as “proof” that he belongs here. He can't tell the official that this place is his and he was born to work and sell here because Lakshmi willed it. Although I know he feels it in his bones.
