---
title: "Lakshmi and the Sultan's Guard"
---
So it goes, that Goddess Lakshmi was leaving the city (some say she was entering- as we will see this liminality is very much the point!) when Sultan Ahmed Shah’s kotwal or royal guard spotted her. Plot points remain fuzzy. Some say that the guard asked her to wait until he could bring the Sultan to her. Others say he saw her leaving and urged her to stay before the gates of the city close for the day. Some say in a bid to compel Goddess Lakshmi to stay, the kotwal sacrificed his life on the very spot where the shrine stands today. Someone else told me that last bit never happened. Regardless, Goddess Lakshmi decided to stay; bestowing the area and the market with ever-lasting prosperity. The vendors say that no matter what you will find a place in this market. From mill-work to self-employment, from rural farm-hand to urban migrant, new mother to community leader, the market and the goddess crafts destinies. 
The shrine is located near the Bhadra fort but Lakshmi was last seen leaving Teen Darwaza. Like the market, Lakshmi occupies the entirety of the intervening space connecting the two structures. It is not clear how old this urban myth is but a diya or lamp has been burning for the last six hundred years in honour of this encounter and Lakshmi’s magnanimity in deciding to stay. I am informed that this lamp sits in an unsuspecting alcove of the Teen Darwaza and its stewards are members of a Muslim family. The goddess, it seems is tied to narratives of syncretism that are partly rooted in reality and partly an urge to paper over obvious inter-communal tensions. 
