---
title: Lakshmi's caretakers, the Sufi past and Muslim-ness in the present. 
---
While the commemorative shrine is located near the Bhadra fort, according to the story, Lakshmi was last seen leaving Teen Darwaza. Like the market, Lakshmi occupies the entirety of the intervening space connecting the two structures. The geographical liminality is epitomized by the fact that Lakshmi's presence is symbolized by a *diya* or lamp at Teen Darwaza- the triple arched gateway that once formed the entrance and egress to the old city. It is not clear how old this urban myth is but the lamp that represents the goddess' magnanimity (and the Sultanate guard's sacrifice) has been burning for the last six hundred years.  
I was informed that this lamp sits in an unsuspecting alcove of the Teen Darwaza where it has been alight ceaselessly for centuries. Its stewards are members of a Muslim family. I am reminded of the surrounding Sufi shrines, each with their own local caretakers who keep the memory of the *Pir* (saint) alive. Lakshmi is not the only enlightened figure who decided to bless the city with their presence and transform it's fortunes. Just below Alif Masjid is a shrine dedicated to Baba Hankori Nagori who is one of the many prominent Sufi saints, theologians and scholarly figures who populated Gujarati cities, often at the request of the Sultan. Jyoti Balachandran in *Narrative Past* points to this "fifteenth-century conjuncture" (p.55) that saw the "historical and narrative constitution of Gujarat's unique and regional identity" (p.195). Lakshmi's lamp and shrine is ensconced within a Sufi spiritual landscape. Moreover like the goddess, these Sufi saints are also remembered for shaping Ahmedabad's distinct urban identity.
"Although I am a Mahomedan, I respect Ma Lakshmi." This is what the vendor who had introduced me to the story of Lakshmi told me. On another occassion, Rajubhai Rumaalwala (Story 1) emphatically asserted, "You will not find this kind of Hindu-Muslim unity anywhere else in the city." Lakshmi's story is central not only to the existence of the market, but also the preservation of religious syncretism. This insistence on harmony in the face of underlying tensions and a painful history of urban violence is something one often encounters. Nevertheless, I do believe Rajubhai when he says this place offers something special that challenges the segregation and ghettoization that has become so normalized in the city.
